Study Material for Training on
Integrated Pest and Disease Management in Chili
Introduction:
Farming of vegetables including chili plays an important role in agriculture economy. This provide more income and
employment than cereal and staple crops as well as healthy foods because of high vitamins and essential micro-nutrients. This
crop has high economic value because it is needed for daily dietary as well as for raw material of food and pharmaceutical
industries. Chili farming in particular has been able to revitalize rural economy through increase in farmers’ income,
agricultural marketing and employment. Chilies are valued for their soothing effects on the digestive system, relief from
symptoms of cold, sore throats and fever. Chilies can act as heart stimulant, which regulates blood flow and strengthens the
arteries possibly reducing the heart attacks. Medicinally, capsaicin is used to alleviate pain. It is most recommended topical
medication for arthritis.
Chili peppers, especially hotter varieties such as Cayenne and Habanero, can also be used externally as a remedy for painful
joints, for frostbite and applied directly to stop bleeding. They stimulate blood flow to the affected area, thus reducing

inflammation and discomfort. Domestic production and economic value: Chilies are grown on an area of 38.4 thousand
hectares with production of 90.4 thousand tones, with an average yield of 1.7 tons per hectare with 1.5 per cent share in the
GDP. Sindh is the major producer of chilies followed by Punjab and Balochistan. Pakistan earned Rs. 1.127 billion during 20032004 by exporting red chili powder, whereas, export earnings from all fruits were Rs. 5.912 billion during the same period. This
reveals the potential of this non-staple crop. Despite its importance the yield has declined from 86.5 (1994-95) to 55.8
thousand tons (2003-04). This decline in yield is due to a number of factors including poor quality seed, mal-cultural practices
and diseases like viruses, collar rot and phytophthora root rot.
World market for chilies: India is the largest producer of chilies in the world contributing 25 per cent of the total world
production, of which only four per cent is exported because of high domestic consumption. Besides India, other major
producers and exporters are China, Pakistan, Morocco, Mexico and Turkey. Major importers of chilies from Pakistan are Gulf
States, the US, Canada, Sri Lanka, the UK, Singapore and Germany.
Aflatoxin and chemical residues are two major constraints in the export of chilies to Europe, Japan and the US as buyers expect
a high degree of hygiene and sanitation in processing and preparing chilies for export.
In Indonesia, chili-planted area is the highest among other vegetables despite the production of cabbage is highest.
Export of red dried chilies from Pakistan has declined from Rs. 1.127 billion (during 2003-2004) to Rs. 846 million after
European Union food authorities have detected the presence of aflatoxin (PHDEB). Off-season production technology to
extend production season of the crop for about two to three months is evolved.
Disease-free seeds should be used by treating them with suitable fungicide like thiram or captan. During nursery raising,
proper cultural practices should be adopted particularly the maintenance of proper soil moisture to avoid phytophthora root
rot and collar rot. While after transplanting, proper insect pest control measures should be carried out to check the population
of sucking insects, which are the vector for viral diseases affecting the chili crop.
To reduce aflatoxin contamination, some precautionary measures should be adopted. These include: picking and drying of fruit
with pedicel (fruit stalk), avoid direct contact of fruit with soil, proper drying of fruit and storage of powder at low relative
humidity and temperature. Furthermore, agronomic factors that may influence aflatoxin development like stresses, irrigation,
cropping pattern, variety, date of planting, date of harvesting and storage conditions, should be studied in detail.

Chili Cultivation season:
Chili season begins in September and lasts till the middle of March. It is a simpler crop to cultivate. It adjusts itself in various
types of soil and different climatic conditions. It gives quality production when it is cultivated on deep, loamy and fertile soil
with balanced moisture content. It is a short span crop. For successful growth of chili crop, proper watering and harvesting is
essential.

The integrated pest management (IPM) has been evolving over the decades to address the deleterious impacts of synthetic
chemical pesticides on environment ultimately affecting the interests of the farmers. The health of a plant is determined by its
environment which includes physical factors (i.e. soil, rain, sunshine hours, wind etc.) and biological factors (i.e. pests, diseases

and weeds). All these factors
can play a role in the balance which exists between herbivore insects and their natural enemies. Understanding the intricate
interactions in an ecosystem can play a critical role in pest management.

Farmers have to make timely decisions about the management of their crops. However, as field conditions continue to
change and new technologies become available, farmers need to continue improving their skills and knowledge. Farmer
should monitor the field situation at least once a week (soil, water, plants, pests, natural enemies, weather factors etc.)

Description of Insect Pests of Chili
1. Gram Pod Borer (Helicoverpa Armigera)
It is a polyphagous pest and the peak activity is noticed during October to June month in chili ecosystem.
Biology:
Egg: The spherical, yellowish eggs are laid singly on tender parts and buds of plants. The egg period lasts for 2-4 days.
Larva: Caterpillars vary in colour, initially brown and later turn greenish with darker broken lines along the side of the body.
The larval period lasts for 18-25 days. Body covered with radiating hairs. When full grown, they measure 3.7 to 5 cm in length.
The full grown caterpillar pupates in the soil in an earthen cell and emerges in 16-21 days.
Pupa: Pupation takes place inside the soil. Pupal stage lasts 7-15 days.

Adult: Moth is stout, medium sized with brownish/greyish forewings with a dark cross band near outer margin and dark spots
near costal margins, with a wing expanse of 3.7cm.
Life Cycle:

Damage Symptoms:
∙ Young larva feeds on the leaves for some time and then attacks fruits. Internal tissues are eaten severely and completely
hollowed out. While feeding the caterpillar thrust its head inside leaving the rest of the body outside.
∙ Bored fruits with round holes.
∙ Fed leaves, shoots and buds.
Management
∙ Choose a tolerant variety.
∙ Keep a minimum distance between your plants at sowing. ∙ Avoid to over-irrigate the fields as this would favor the
pest. ∙ Monitor your plants frequently and check for the presence of larva. ∙ Collect and destroy the infected fruit and
grown up larva. ∙ Spray any one of the following insecticides
Insecticide Dose
Emamectin benzoate 5% SG 4 g/10 lit
Flubendiamide 20 WDG 6 g/10 lit
Indoxacarb 14.5% SC 6.5 ml/10 lit Novaluron 10% EC 7.5 ml/10 lit Spinosad 45% SC 3.2 ml/10 lit Thiodicarb
75%WP 2 g/10 lit

2. Tobacco Caterpillar (Spodoptera litura)

It is found throughout the tropical and sub-tropical parts of the world, wide spread in India. Besides tobacco, it feeds on
cotton, castor, groundnut, CHILLI, cabbage and various other cruciferous crops.

Biology:

Eggs: Female lays about 300 eggs in clusters. The eggs are covered over by brown hairs and they hatch in about 3-5 days.

Larva: Caterpillar measures 35-40 mm in length, when full grown. It is velvety, black with yellowish – green dorsal stripes and
lateral white bands with incomplete ring – like dark band on anterior and posterior end of the body. It passes through 6 instars.
Larval stage lasts 15-30 days.

Pupa: Pupation takes place inside the soil. Pupal stage lasts 7-15 days.

Adult: Moth is medium sized and stout bodied with forewings pale grey to dark brown in colour having wavy white crisscross
markings. Hind wings are whitish with brown patches along the margin of wing.

Life cycle:

Damage Symptoms:
∙ Pest breeds throughout the year.
∙ Moths are active at night.
∙ Adults live for 7-10 days. Total life cycle takes 32-60 days.
∙ There are eight generations in a year.
∙ Small holes on leaves. Skeletonized leaves and the affected pods drop off or develop white color on drying.
Management:
∙ Plough the soil and expose to sun to kill the Pupae.

∙ Collect and destroy the egg masses, gregarious larvae and grown up caterpillars. ∙ Set up Pheromone trap
∙ Use poison bait pellets prepared with rice bran 12.5 kg, jaggery 1.25 kg, Carbaryl 50% WP 1.25 kg and water 7.5 litres and
spread in the fields in the evening hours so that the caterpillars coming out of the soil feed and get killed.
∙ Spray Lufenuron 5% EC at 1 ml/ lit or Novaluron 10% EC at 1 ml/lit
∙ Spray Chlorpyiriphos 2.5 ml/lit of water or Quinalphos 2 ml/lit of water.

3. Spider Mites (Tetranychus urticae)

Spider mites are less than 1mm (0.04 inch) in size and vary in color. They lay small, spherical, initially transparent eggs and
many species spin silk webbing to help protect the colony from predators. They get the ‘spider’ part of their common name
from this webbing.
Biology:

Eggs: Overwinter under bark, in fallen leaf matter, and other areas that provide shelter. During the growing season they can be
found on the undersides of leaves. They usually hatch within three days. Larva: Begin hatching after the last frost has passed
and have six legs. Little feeding is done by this stage.

Nymph: Looks similar to the adult, but slightly smaller and unable to reproduce. There are two nymph stages: proto-nymph and
deuto-nymph.

Adult: About 0.4 mm long with eight legs, adult spider mites can be pale yellow to green or orange to brown. Females lay
between 50-100 eggs throughout their lives with unfertilized eggs hatching as males and fertilized eggs hatching as females.

Life Cycle:

Damage Symptoms:

∙ The infested leaves develop crinkles and curl downwards

∙ Elongated petiole
∙ Buds become brittle and drop down.

∙ Early stage, infestation leads to stunted growth and flower production, fruit set are arrested

Management:

∙ Chemical pesticide use actually encourages the spread of spider mites by killing the beneficial insects that prey on them.
Mites are also known to develop quick resistance to various pesticides. For these reasons, it’s important to control mites
with effective natural and organic methods.
∙ Prune leaves, stems and other infested parts of plants well past any webbing and discard in trash (and not in compost
piles). Don’t be hesitant to pull entire plants to prevent the mites spreading to its neighbors.
∙ Existing spider mite populations should be treated with organic knockdown sprays if allowed. Naturally derived insecticide
sprays like Neem Oil, Pyrethrins, Azadirachtin and Horticultural Oil can be sprayed directly onto adult mites, larvae, nymphs
and eggs to kill on contact. Apply to active spider mite infestations at 3-day intervals until control is achieved.

4. Thrips(Scirtothrips dorsalis):
It is a pest of economic significance with a broad host range, with prominent pest reports on crops including pepper, mango,
citrus, strawberry, grapes etc. Chili thrips appear to feed preferentially on new growth and infested plants usually develop
characteristic wrinkled leaves, with distinctive brown scarring along the veins of leaves.

Biology:
Egg: Hyaline, globular laid in mass.
Nymphs: Nymphs tiny, slender, fragile and straw yellow in color.
Adult: Adults with heavily fringed wings

Life Cycle:

Damage Symptoms:
∙ The infested leaves curl upward, crumble and shed
∙ Infested buds become brittle and drop down.
∙ Affected fruits show light brown scars
∙ Early stage, infestation leads to stunted growth and flower production, fruit set are arrested

Host-range and favourable conditions:
∙ S. dorsalis is found in almost all chilly growing areas. It is a polyphagus pest. Besides chilli, it also infests brinjal, cotton,
groundnut, castor, bottlegourd, guava, tea and grapevine. It is more common on un-irrigated chilli crop than irrigated one.

Upward Curling

Plant shows stunted growth and elongation of petiole

Management:
∙ Select resistant varieties, if available.
∙ Use sticky traps to monitor thrips population.
∙ Remove heavily infested plants from the field.
∙ Keep the soil well irrigated and avoid excessive nitrogen fertilizer application. ∙ Remove weeds in the and around the field
which might act as a hosts.
∙ Always consider an integrated approach with preventive measures together with biological treatments if available. Foliar
sprays containing Malathion are recommended for thrips. ∙ Apply neem oil, spinetoram or spinosad to both sides of the leaves
and around the plant’s base. ∙ Avoid overuse of insecticides to preserve population of beneficial insects.

5. Aphids (Aphidoidea)
They are small, soft-bodied insects that can survive in almost any zone. Aphids multiply quickly, so it’s important to get them
under control before reproduction starts. Many generations can occur in one season. The good news is that they tend to move
rather slowly and aphid control is relatively easy.

Biology:
Eggs are very tiny, shiny-black, and are found in the crevices of bud, stems, and barks of the plant. Aphids usually do not lay
eggs in warm parts of the world.
Nymphs (immature stages) are young aphids, they look like the wingless adults but are smaller. They become adults within 7 to
10 days.
Adults are small, 1 to 4 mm long, soft-bodied insects with two long antennae that resemble horns. Most aphids have two short
cornicles (horns) towards the rear of the body

Life Cycle:

Damage Symptoms:
∙ Appear on the tender shoots, leaves and on the lower surface of the leaves. ∙ The honeydew is very sweet which attracts
sooty mould growth, making the leaves turn black. ∙ Suck the sap and reduce the vigour of the plant.
∙ Secrete sweet substances which attracts ants and develops sooty mould.
∙ The pods that develop black color due to sooty mould lose quality and fetch low price.
∙ The yields are also reduced by aphids directly and more through the spread of virus diseases acting as vectors indirectly
Management:
∙ Try spraying cold water on the leaves. Sometimes all aphids need is a cool blast to dislodge them. Typically they are unable to
find their way back to the same plant.
∙ If you have a large aphid population, dust plants with flour. It constipates the pests. ∙ Neem oil, insecticidal soaps, and
horticultural oils are effective against aphids. Be sure to follow the application instructions provided on the packaging.
∙ Insecticides containing cypermethrin, chlorpyriphos or flonicamid can be used as foliar sprays at 30, 45, 60 days after sowing
to control this pest.

Description of plant Diseases

1. Damping off: Pythium aphanidermatum
Damage symptoms:
Disease of nursery beds and young seedlings resulting in reduced seed germination and poor stand of seedlings.
Very high seedling mortality 25-75%
∙ Pre-emergence damping off: Seedlings disintegrate before they come out of soil surface leading to poor seed germination
∙ Post-emergence damping off is characterized by development of disease after seedlings have emerged out of soil but before
the stems are lignified
∙ Water soaked lesion formation at collar region
∙ Infected areas turn brown and rot
∙ Plants shrivel and collapse as a result of softening of tissues
∙ In Rhizoctonia solani attack infected stems become hard, thin (wire stem symptoms) and infected seedlings topple Disease
appear in patches both in nursery and field beds.
Survival and spread:
Primary: Oospores in soil in case of Pythium
Sclerotia in soil in case of Rhizoctonia
Secondary: Zoospores through irrigation water in case of Pythium. Mycelial growth in soil and sclerotia through irrigation
water in case of Rhizoctonia.
Favorable conditions:
Heavy rainfall, excessive and frequent irrigation, poorly drained soil and close spacing, high soil moisture with temp around
25-30 °C
For Rhizoctonia: High soil moisture with temp around 30 – 35 °C.
Management:
∙ Use seeds from Healthy plants or from certified sources.
∙ Avoid excessive moisture by soil drainage.
∙ Avoid too frequent irrigation during the vegetative growth of the crop.
∙ Bio-fungicides based on the bacteria Bacillus subtilis can be used to control the transmission of the disease.
∙ In fields with histories of damping-off or problems with drainage consider using fungicides preventively. For example, the
seeds can be treated with ceresin or with 1% Bordeaux mixture.

2. Die-back Anthracnose (fruit rot): Colletotrichum spp
Damage Symptoms:
∙ Disease is more in December - October in transplanted crop
∙ Small, circular to irregular, brownish black scattered spots appear on leaves ∙ Severely infected leaves defoliate
∙ Infection of growing tips leads to necrosis of branches from tip backwards ∙ Necrotic tissues appear grayish white with black
dot like acervuli in the center ∙ Shedding of flowers due to the infection at pedicel and tips of branches
∙ Fruit symptoms
∙ Ripe fruits are more vulnerable to attack than green ones

∙ Small, circular, yellowish to pinkish sunken spots appear on fruits
∙ Spots increase along fruit length attaining elliptical shape
∙ Severe infection result in the shrivelling and drying of fruits.
∙ Tissues around lesions will be bleached and turn white or greyish in color and lose their pungency
∙ On the surface of the lesions minute black dot like fruiting bodies called ‘acervuli’ develop in concentric rings and fruits
appear straw colored
∙ The affected fruits may fall off subsequently. The seeds produced in severely infected fruits are discolored and covered with
mycelial mat.
Survival and spread:
Primary: Mycelium and conidia in acervuli in infected seeds and diseased crop debris. Secondary: Conidia dispersed by rain
splash and wind.
Favourable conditions:
Temp, 28 °C with RH more than 97%, humid weather with rainfall at frequent intervals, intercropping with turmeric which is
another host of the fungus

Management:
∙ Use of resistant varieties not only eliminate the losses from diseases, but also eliminate chemical and mechanical expenses of
disease control.
∙ Pathogen-free chili seeds should be planted and weeds eliminated. Crops should be rotated every 2-3 years with crops that
are not alternative hosts of Colletotrichum.
∙ The field should have good drainage and be free from infected plant debris. ∙ Chemicals are most common and practical
method to control anthracnose diseases. The fungicide traditionally recommended for anthracnose management in chili is
Manganese ethylenebisdithiocarbamate although it does not consistently control the severe form of the disease.
∙ The strobilurin fungicides azoxystrobin, trifloxystrobin and pyraclostrobin have recently been labeled for the control of
Anthracnose of chili.

3. Mosaic complex:

Damage Symptoms:
Symptoms vary with the virus TMV
∙ Raised blisters and mottled areas of light and dark green areas on the foliage ∙ Leaves point towards ground
∙ Necrotic spots on stem
∙ Fruit ripens unevenly and is reduced in size CMV
∙ Reduction in leaf size and narrowing of lamina Chlorosis leading to mosaic symptoms ∙ Downward curling along with midrib
∙ Fruit may be small and distorted, on volunteer CHILLI plants and on infected plant debris.

Disease symptoms on plant foliage
Survival and spread:
TMV:
Primary: Externally seed borne virus particles
Secondary: Mechanically transmitted virus particles.
CMV:
Primary: Externally seed borne virus particles to some extent and vector transmitted from other and collateral hosts
Secondary: Virus particles transmitted by aphid vectors, Myzus persicae, Aphis gossypii, A. craccivora Favorable conditions:
∙ Moist weather and splattering rains
∙ High humidity or persistent dew

Management:
∙ There are no cures for viral diseases such as mosaic once a plant is infected. As a result, every effort should be made to
prevent the disease from entering the field.
∙ Fungicides will not treat this viral disease.
∙ Use the resistant varieties when available.
∙ Do not save seed from infected crops.
∙ The virus can be spread through human activity, tools and equipment. Frequently wash your hands.
∙ Avoid working in the garden during damp conditions. Avoid using tobacco around susceptible plants. Cigarettes and other
tobacco products may be infected and can spread the virus ∙ Remove and destroy all infected plants. Do not compost.

4. Powdery Mildew: Leveillula taurica
Damage Symptoms:
∙ White powdery coating appears mostly on the lower surface and occasionally on upper surface ∙ Correspondingly on the
upper surface yellow patches are seen
∙ Severe infection results in the drying and shedding of affected leaves

∙ Powdery growth can also be seen on branches and young fruits
∙ Diseased fruits do not grow further and may drop down prematurely
Survival and spread:
Primary: Dormant mycelium in the infected crop debris Secondary: Wind dispersed conidia

Favorable conditions:
∙ Cool dry weather favors conidial germination ∙ High RH favors disease development
Management:
∙ Use resistant or tolerant varieties
∙ Remove infected leaves when the first spot appear. Do not touch healthy plants after touching the infected plants.
∙ In view of the number of crops that are susceptible to powdery mildew, it is difficult to recommend any particular chemical
treatment. Fungicides based on wettable Sulphur, triflumizole, myclobutanil seem to control the growth of fungus.

5. Cercospora Leaf Spot: Cercospora Capsici

Damage Symptoms:
∙ Circular spots with brown margins and grey centre appear on leaves
∙ The spots enlarge and coalesce with others
∙ The central portion of the spot becomes white and the leaves turn yellow and defoliate ∙ Sometimes central portion of spot
drops off
∙ Spots also appear on stems and twigs as dark brown, irregular lesions with whitish centers ∙ In severe cases die-back of twigs
occur
Survival and spread:
Primary: Dormant mycelium in the infected crop debris, seeds and volunteer plants Secondary: Wind dispersed conidia

Management:
∙ Use healthy and certified seeds.
∙ Use stakes to keep plants upright.
∙ Monitor seedbeds, young plants or transplants for any disease symptoms.
∙ Remove the infected plants and destroy them away from the field.
∙ Seed treatment with captan 3g/kg works fine to fight the disease.
∙ Other treatments to control this disease include foliar spray of products containing copper hydroxide, chlorothalonil or
mancozeb. Treatment should start when the spots appear and continue at 10-14 days intervals until 3-4 weeks before last
harvest. It is important to spray both sides of the leaves.

6. Bacterial Leaf Spot: Xanthomonas campestris pv. Vesicatoria

Damage Symptoms:
∙ Leaves, fruits and stems are affected
∙ Lesions on leaf begin as circular, water soaked spots ∙ Spots become necrotic with brown center with chlorotic borders ∙
Enlarged spots may develop straw colored centers
∙ Lesions are slightly raised on lower leaf surface
∙ Severely spotted leaves turn yellow and drop
∙ Raised brown lesions appear on fruits
∙ Narrow elongated lesions or streaks may develop on stems

Survival and spread:
Primary: Seed borne bacterial cells
Secondary: Bacterial cells spread by rain splash
Favorable conditions:
∙ Moderate temperature
∙ High relative humidity
∙ Intermittent rains

Management:
∙ The use of disease free seed and transplants is important for the early control of the Bacterial leaf spot.
∙ Avoid using overhead irrigation.

∙ Copper sprays can provide moderate levels of protection, but must be sprayed as a preventive and not a curative.
∙ Spray mancozeb 1ml/10 lit of water at 14 day intervals
∙ Spray regularly if prolonged wet weather occurs.

7. Alternaria Leaf Spot: Alternaria solani

Damage Symptoms:

∙ This is a common disease occurring on the foliage at any stage of the growth. ∙ The fungus attacks the foliage causing
characteristic leaf spots and blight. Early blight is first observed on the plants as small, black lesions mostly on the older foliage.
∙ Spots enlarge, and by the time they are one-fourth inch in diameter or larger, concentric rings in a bull's eye pattern can be
seen in the center of the diseased area.
∙ Tissue surrounding the spots may turn yellow. If high temperature and humidity occur at this time, much of the foliage is
killed.
∙ Lesions on the stems are similar to those on leaves, sometimes girdling the plant if they occur near the soil line.
∙ Transplants showing infection by the late blight fungus often die when set in the field. The fungus also infects the fruit,
generally through the calyx or stem attachment.
∙ Lesions attain considerable size, usually involving nearly the entire fruit; concentric rings are also present on the fruit.

Disease symptoms on leaf and fruit

Survival and spread:
Primary: The fungus spends the winter in infected plant debris in or on the soil where it can survive at least one and perhaps
several years. It can also be seed borne.
Secondary: The spores are transported by water, wind, insects, other animals including man, and machinery. Once the initial
infections have occurred, they become the most important source of new spore production and are responsible for rapid
disease spread.
Favourable conditions:
∙ Warm, rainy and wet weather

Management:
∙ Prune or stake plants to improve air circulation and reduce fungal problems. ∙ Apply copper-based fungicides early, two weeks
before disease normally appears or when weather forecasts predict a long period of wet weather. Alternatively, begin
treatment when disease first appears, and repeat every 7-10 days for as long as needed.
∙ Remove and destroy all the debris after the harvest. Burn or bag infected plant parts. Do not compost.

8. Fusarium Wilt: Fusarium Solani

Damage Symptoms:
∙ The first symptom of the disease is clearing of the veinlets and chlorosis of the leaves. ∙ The younger leaves may die in
succession and the entire may wilt and die in a course of few days. Soon the petiole and the leaves droop and wilt.
∙ In young plants, symptom consists of clearing of veinlet and dropping of petioles. In field, yellowing of the lower leaves first
and affected leaflets wilt and die.
∙ The symptoms continue in subsequent leaves. At later stage, browning of vascular system occurs. Plants become stunted and
die.

Survival and spread:
∙ Soil and implements
Favorable conditions:
∙ Relatively high soil moisture and soil temperature
Management:
∙ Use resistant varieties if available.
∙ High nitrogen fertilizers may increase susceptibility to the disease. Test your soil and use a slow release organic fertilizer.
∙ Trichoderma viride and also be used to treat the seeds (10g/kg).
∙ Mycostop is a biological fungicide that will safely protect crops against wilt caused by Fusarium. ∙ Apply soil based fungicides
on contaminated locations if no other measures are effective. Drenching the soil with copper oxychloride at 3g/Liter of water

before sowing/transplanting is also effective.

9. Sclerotium Rofsii: Athelia rofsii

Damage Symptoms:
∙ Development of coarse white strands of mycelium growing in a fan-shaped pattern on lower stems, leaf litter, and soil.
∙ Early symptoms consist of water-soaked lesions on crown and lower stem tissue. ∙ Disease usually is recognized by the
yellowing and wilting of foliage, followed by a complete collapse of the plant.
∙ Fruit and other fleshy organs near the soil surface may become infected with S. rolfsii. ∙ Soft, water-soaked, sunken, slightly
yellowish lesions develop. These lesions quickly spread throughout most or all of the fruit, which will eventually become soft
and collapse within 3 to 4 days of infection.

Favorable conditions:
∙ The disease occurs worldwide, but predominantly in warm climates.

Management:
∙ Avoiding the disease by selecting fields that are free of S. rolfsii is the most successful method of control.
∙ Certain fertilization regimes, such as high calcium levels and ammonium type fertilizers, may suppress disease under low
disease pressure. Certain non-acidifying fertilizers such as calcium nitrate can be used to prevent acidifying soil and creating
conditions conducive to disease development.
∙ Fungicide applications can be used to manage southern blight. Most fungicides are labeled for use on select ornamentals,
vegetables, and some field crops.
∙ Fumigants are toxic to sclerotia and mycelium in the soil. However, even after fumigation, some sclerotia survive, and
treatments must be repeated annually.

Do’s and Don’ts in IPM
No.

Do’s

Don’ts

1.

Deep ploughing is to be done on bright

Do not plant or irrigate the field after

sunny days during the months of May and

ploughing, at least for 2-3 weeks, to allow

June. The field should be kept exposed to

desiccation of weed’s bulbs and/or rhizomes

sun light at least for 2-3 weeks

of perennial weeds.

2.

Adopt crop rotation.

Avoid growing monocrop.

3.

Grow only recommended varieties.

Do not grow varieties not suitable for
the season or the region.

4

Sow early in the season

Avoid late sowing as this may lead to
reduced yields and incidence of white
grubs and diseases.

5

Always treat the seeds with approved

Do not use seeds without seed treatment

chemicals/bio products for the control

with biocides/chemicals.

of seed borne diseases/pests.

6.

Sow in rows at optimum depths under
proper

moisture conditions for better

establishment.

Do not sow seeds beyond 5-7 cm depth.

7.

Apply only recommended herbicides

Pre-emergent as well as soil incorporated

at recommended dose, proper time,

herbicides should not be applied in dry soils.

as appropriate spray solution with

Do not apply herbicides along with irrigation

standard equipment along with flat

water or by mixing with soil, sand or urea.

fan or flat jet nozzles.
8.

Maintain optimum and healthy crop

Crops should not be exposed to moisture

stand which would be capable of

deficit stress at their critical growth stages.

competing with weeds at a critical stage
of crop weed competition.
9

Use NPK fertilizers as per the

Avoid imbalanced use of fertilizers.

soil test recommendation.

10

11

Use micronutrient mixture after

Do not apply any micronutrient mixture

sowing based test

after sowing without test

recommendations.

recommendations.

Install pheromone traps at

Do not store the pheromone lures at normal

appropriate Period.

room temperature (keep them in
refrigerator).

12

In case of pests which are active during

Do not spray pesticides at midday since, most

night like Spodoptera spray

of the insects are not active during this

recommended biocides/ chemicals at the

period.

time of their appearance in the night.
13

Spray pesticides thoroughly to treat the

Do not spray pesticides only on the

undersurface of the leaves, particularly

upper surface of leaves.

for mites, whiteflies, Spodoptera etc.

Plantix:
Plantix is an android mobile crop advisory app for farmers, agriculture extension officers and gardeners. It can diagnose plant
diseases, pest damages and nutrient deficiencies affecting crops and offers corresponding treatment measures by processing a

plant damage symptom image taken by a smart phone. Users can participate in the online community to network with other
farmers, discuss plant health issues and access their local weather reports. Plantix was developed by PEAT GmbH, a Berlin
based Artificial Intelligence startup. PEAT partner ICRISAT customized Plantix for local crops in India through a consortium of
partners like state agricultural universities in India.
Plantix app is able to identify the plant type as well as the appearance of a possible disease, pest or nutrient deficiency. Plantix
takes advantage of deep learning technology which involves neural networks. Furthermore, it provides information on
treatment and preventive measures. From the daily new images sent by Plantix users worldwide, the network constantly learns
more. This permanent incoming data stream is the basis to providing Plantix users with up-to-date information and alerts in
terms of plant diseases, pests and their worldwide distribution in real time.
Plantix already cooperates with international research institutes and inter-governmental organizations such as ICRISAT,
CIMMYT and CABI. The Agriculture and Horticulture Department of the Government of Andhra Pradesh, India has already
integrated Plantix into its extension services. Plantix preview (beta version) can be freely downloaded from google play store
from around the world. Details of this innovative plant protection advisory app can be found at www.plantix.net

Acknowledgements:
Study material has been compiled from:
1) Agro-Eco Systems Analysis (AESA) based IPM – Chilies/Capsicum by Department of Agriculture and Cooperation,
Ministry of Agriculture, Government of INDIA. 2) Plantix

